So let's dive into promises and the fetch API,
at least the very basics about these two concepts since they are core building blocks of progressive
web apps and since we use both concepts a lot in service workers.
So let's start with promises and let's start with recognizing that Javascript is single threaded,
it executes on a single thread.
So if you have a Javascript code, for example you fetch data from a server, you might also have some code waiting
for three seconds with set timeout or you have any other generic long running operation,
you of course recognize that all these three tasks triggered by regular Javascript are asynchronous, they
don't finish immediately.
So you could think that since we have a single thread, it looks like this.
We have the three tasks executing after each other because we only have one thread
available, we have no multitasking like this.
So we fetch data from a server and we can only continue once this finished, then we wait for the three
seconds and then we have the other long running operation, even though theoretically we might want
to execute all three at the same time.
This is not how it works in Javascript,
instead we work like this in Javascript.
We handle asynchronous code by starting the asynchronous tasks and then waiting for responses in the
future and in-between, we get some free time we can spend on other operations.
We do this with callbacks already, you probably know callbacks, this is how they look like.
Here's a simple callback in our app.js file, it will execute right at the start
when we first parse this file. I'll use set timeout since it's easy to understand and write,
we want to wait for three seconds to stick with the example from the slides.
The first argument to set timeout is a function though, the so-called callback.
This is an anonymous function here
but we could also point to some named function.
The key thing is after the time period specified as the second argument,
this function will get executed.
This allows us to immediately proceed with execution,
for example with this line of code, this is executed right after set timeout.
Now if set timeout were blocking the main thread, then we would have to wait for three seconds before
we see this console log. To see that the opposite is the case,
let's simply console log something in that function we call in set timeout too, this is executed
once the timer is done. If we now save this, we go back to our application and open the console and we
reload the application,
you see this is executed right after set timeout and only after three seconds you see this is executed
once the timer is done, let me increase this in size.
Here is the first log,
this is executed right after set timeout and then we get the timer is done log,
even though in our code, they are exactly
the other way around.
First we would execute this, then this line
but again since it is this non-blocking, we get to this line immediately.
This is how Javascript works and how it should work because otherwise we would block the single thread
with every asynchronous operation we do. Now using callbacks is a fine way of handling asynchronous code
like this
but we can quickly enter callback hell.
You enter this hell whenever you nest asynchronous operations into each other and
you've probably been there in your Javascript applications. That's why promises came up,
let's have a look at how we could rewrite this example with promises in the next lecture.